[CHANTING]
>> We want to think about God.
God is a thought.
God is an idea,
but its reference
is to something that
transcends all thinking.
I mean, he's beyond
being, beyond the category
of being a non-being.
Is he or is he not?
Neither is nor is not.
Every god, every
mythology, every religion
is true in this sense.
It is true as metaphorical of
the human and cosmic mystery.
He who thinks he
knows doesn't know.
He who knows that he
doesn't know knows.
[CHANTING]
There is an old story that is
still good, story of the quest,
the spiritual quest,
that's to say,
to find the inward thing
which you basically are.
All of the symbols in
mythology refer to you.
Have you been reborn?
Have you died to
your animal nature
and come to life as
a human incarnation?
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
You are God in your
deepest identity.
You are one with
the transcendent.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Campbell's own quest began at
the Museum of Natural History
in New York City, on the
eve of the First World War.
He wasn't yet 10 years old.
And when he saw the totem poles
and masks of Native Americans,
he was mesmerized.
Who made them, he asked.
What do they mean?
Right then and there began
the lifelong fascination
that would make him one of the
world's foremost authorities
on mythology, a prolific writer,
and an extraordinary teacher.
Pure intuition brought us
back to this very place
where his long journey
started, to the American
Museum of Natural History,
just a few months,
as it turned out, before
Joe's unexpected death.
We had finished two Summers of
discussions at George Lucas's
Skywalker Ranch in
California, where Campbell
had worked with the film
director on his epic "Star
Wars" trilogy.
Joe went home to Hawaii,
and I returned to New York
with my team to begin
the editing that
would turn those conversations
into our PBS series,
"The Power Of Myth."
Over many hours, Joe and
I talked about his life's
adventure with mythology.
One moment, we'd be
discussing the folklore
of Native Americans, the next we
were considering a Tibetan sand
painting or courtship and
Troubadours in medieval Europe,
or the hero's
journey, which runs
through mythology from
ancient times to the present.
Back in New York,
screening the raw tapes,
I was again in all of
Campbell's familiarity
with the world's
art and literature,
his encyclopedic knowledge
of stories humans
have taught for
tens of thousands
of years, stories that
transcend everyday experience,
from the crucifixion of Christ
to the Enlightenment of Buddha
to the sacrifice of
soldiers in combat.
Suddenly, a light bulb
went off in my head.
Circles.
I turned to my
colleagues and said,
we didn't talk about circles,
and circles are the key
to Joe's understanding of God.
I picked up the phone and called
him in Hawaii, and I said,
we must have one more session.
We haven't talked about circles.
He chuckled and
agreed, you're on.
So we met in New York at
the museum on Central Park.
We didn't know this would
be our last time together.
But looking back,
I am tempted to see
in his face and his bearing the
premonition that his life was
nearing its end.
I'm not sure.
What I do remember most
vividly from that evening
is that I had never seen
so much life in his eyes.
Is there something in
common in every culture that
creates this need for God?
>> Well, I think anyone who has
an experience of mystery at all
knows that there is a
dimension, let's say,
of the universe that is not
that which is available to his
senses.
There's a wonderful saying
in one of the Upanishads,
when before a sunset or a
mountain and the beauty of this
or of that, you
pause and say, ah,
that is participation
in divinity.
And I think that's what it is.
It's the realization
of wonder, and also
the experience of
tremendous power,
which people of course,
living in the world of nature
are experiencing all the time.
You know there's
something there that much
bigger than the human
dimension and our way
of thinking in
the West, largely,
is that god is the
source of the energy.
The way in most
oriental thinking,
and I think in most what we
call primitive thinking also,
is that god is a manifestation
of the energy, not its source,
that God is the
vehicle of the energy.
And the level of energy that
is involved are represented
determines the
character of the god.
There are gods of violence,
there are gods of compassion,
there are gods
that unite the two.
There are gods that are
the protectors of kings
in their war campaigns.
These are personifications
of the energy that's in play.
And what the source
of the energy is--
what's the source of the energy
of these lights around us?
I mean, this is a total mystery.
>> Doesn't this make
a faith in anarchy,
a sort of continuing war
among principalities?
>> As life is, yes.
I mean, even in your mind,
when it comes to do anything,
there will be a war, a
decision as to priorities.
What should you do now?
Or in relationship
to other people,
there would be four
or five possibilities
from my way of action, and the
notion of divinity or divine
life, then my mind would be what
would determine my decision.
If it were rather
crude, it would
be a rather crude decision.
>> Is divinity
just what we think?
>> Yes.
>> What does that do to faith?
>> Well, that's a
tough one about faith.
>> You are a man of faith.
You're a man of wonder and--
>> Yeah, I don't
have to have faith.
I have experience.
>> What kind of experience?
>> Well, I have experience
with the wonder of the life.
I have experience of
love, I have experience
of hatred and malice.
I'd like to punch the guy's
jaw, and I admit this.
But those are
different divinities,
I mean, from the point of
view of a symbolic imaging.
Those are different than
images operating in me.
For instance, when
I was a little boy
was being brought
up a Roman Catholic,
I was told I had a guardian
angel on my right side
and a tempting devil on my left.
And when it came to making a
decision of what I would do,
the decision would
depend on which
one had most influence on me.
And I must say
that in my boyhood,
and I think also in the
people who were teaching me,
they actually concretized
those thoughts.
>> They did what?
>> It was an angel.
That angel is a fact
and the devil is a fact.
Do you see?
Otherwise, one thinks of them as
metaphors for the energies that
are afflicting and guiding you.
>> And those energies come from?
>> From your own life, the
energy of your own body.
Your different
organs in your body,
including your head
the conflict systems.
>> And your life
comes from where?
>> There you are.
From the ultimate energy that's
the life of the universe.
And then you say, well,
somebody has to generate that.
Why do you have to say that?
Why can't it be impersonal?
That would be brahman.
That would be the
transcendent mystery
that you can also personify.
>> Can men and women live
with and impersonality?
>> Yes.
They do all over the place.
Just go east of Suez.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the East, the gods
are much more elemental.
>> Elemental?
>> Elemental, less human, and
more like the powers of nature.
I see a deity as representing
an energy system.
And part of the energy system
is the human energy systems
of love and malice, hate,
benevolence, compassion.
And in oriental
thinking, the God
is the vehicle and the
energy, not its source.
>> Well, of course, the heart
of the Christian faith is that
these elemental forces
you're talking about embodied
themselves in a human being
and reconciling mankind to god.
>> Yes, and the basic Buddhist
idea is that that is true
of you as well, and that what
Jesus was a person who realized
that in himself and lived out
of the Christhood of his nature.
>> What do you
think about Jesus?
>> We just don't know Jesus.
All we know are four
contradictory texts
that tell us what he did.
>> Written many
years after he lived.
>> But I think we
know what Jesus said.
I think the sayings of Jesus
are probably pretty close.
But when you read the
Thomas gospel, the Gospel
according to Thomas, which
was dug up there in that--
with those other Gnostic texts,
it has all the flavor of one
of the synoptics--
Matthew, Mark, or Luke--
except that it doesn't
say quite the same thing.
There's one wonderful passage.
It's the last one in
the gospel, actually.
When will the kingdom come?
Now, in Mark 13,
I think it is, we
hear that the end of the
world is going to come.
That's to say, a
mythological image--
that's the end of
the world-- is taken
as a reference to an actual,
physical, historical fact
to be.
When you read the Thomas
gospel, Jesus says,
the kingdom of the father
will not come by expectation.
The kingdom of the father
is spread upon the Earth
and then do we not see it.
So I look at you
now in that sense,
and the radiance of the
presence of the divine
is known to me through you.
>> Through me?
>> You, sure.
>> A journalist?
>> Jesus also says in this text,
he who drinks from my mouth
will become as I am,
and I shall be he.
He's talking from
the point of view
of that being of beings,
which we call a Christ, who
is the being of all of us.
And anyone who lives in
relation to that is as Christ,
and anyone who incarnates, or
rather, brings into his life
the message of the word
is equivalent to Jesus.
That's the sense there.
>> So that's what you
mean when you say,
I am radiating God to you.
>> You are, yes.
>> And you to me.
>> And I'm speaking
this seriously.
>> No, no, I take it seriously.
I happen to believe
the same as you
without being able to
articulate it as you do.
I do sense that
there is divinity,
that divinity is in the other.
>> So you are the vehicle.
You are, as it were,
radiant of the Spirit.
And that's-- why
not recognize it?
>> I'll tell you what the
most gripping scripture
in the Christian New
Testament is for me.
It says, I believe
help thou my unbelief.
>> I believe in what?
>> I believe in this
ultimate reality,
and that I can experience
it, that I do experience it.
But I don't have
answers to my questions.
I believe in the question.
Is there a God?
>> I had a very amusing
experience which might be well
worth telling.
I was in the New York
Athletic Club swimming pool.
And you know, you don't
wear your collar this way
or that way when you're
in a swimming pool.
And I was introduced
to a priest--
this is father so-and-so,
this is Joseph Campbell.
I'm a professor.
He's a professor at one of
our Catholic universities.
So after I'd had my swim, I
came and sat down beside--
in what we call the
horizontal athlete situation,
and the priest is beside me.
And he said, Mr Campbell,
are you a priest?
I said, no, Father.
He said, are you a Catholic?
I said, I was, Father.
He said-- and now he had the
sense to ask it this way,
do you believe in
a personal god?
I said, no, Father.
And he said, well,
I suppose there
is no way to prove by logic the
existence of a personal god.
And I said, if there
were, Father, what
would be the value of faith?
Well, Mr Campbell, it's nice to
have met you, and he was off.
I really felt I'd
done a jujitsu trick.
But that was a very
illuminating conversation to me.
The fact that he
asked, do you believe
in a personal god,
that meant that he also
recognized the possibility
of the Brahman,
of the transcendent energy.
>> Well, then, what is religion?
>> Well, the word religion
means "religio," linking back,
linking back the phenomenal
person to a source.
If we say it is the
one life in both of us,
then my separate life has
been linked to the one
life, religio, linked back.
>> And then?
>> And this becomes symbolized
in the images of religion,
which represent that
connecting link.
>> Your friend Jung,
the great psychologist,
says that the most powerful
religious symbol is the circle.
He says, the circle is one of
the great primordial images
of mankind, that in considering
the symbol of the circle
we are analyzing the self.
And I find you, in your own
work throughout the course
of your life, coming
across the circle,
whether it's in the magical
designs the world over,
whether it's in
the architecture,
both ancient and
modern, whether it's
in the dome-shaped
temples of India
or the calendar
stone to the Aztecs
or the ancient
Chinese bronze shields
or the visions of the Old
Testament prophet Ezekiel,
whom you talk about,
the wheel in the sky.
You keep coming
across this image.
>> Yeah, it's ever present.
It's the center from
which you've come,
back to which you'll go.
I remember reading in a book
about the American Indians,
called "The Indian
Book" by Natalie Curtis
that was published around 1904,
her conversation with a chief.
I think it was the chief
of the Pawnee tribe.
And among other things he
said was, when we pitch camp,
we pitch a camp in a circle.
When we look at the horizon,
the horizon is in a circle.
When the eagle builds a nest,
the nest is in a circle.
And then you read
in Plato somewhere,
the soul is a circle.
I suppose the circle
represents a totality.
Within the circle is one thing.
It is encircled, it's enframed.
That would be the
spatial aspect.
But the temporal
aspect of the circle
is you leave, go somewhere, and
come back, the alpha and omega.
God is the alpha and omega,
the source and the end.
Somehow the circle suggests
immediately completed totality,
whether in time or in space.
>> No beginning, no end.
>> Well, round and
round and round.
The year, well, this
is November again,
and we're about to
have Thanksgiving again
have Christmas again.
And then not only the year,
but the month, the moon cycle,
and the day, the cycle.
And we're reminded of this
when we look on our watch
and see the cycle of time.
It's the same hour,
the same hour,
but another day, and
all that sort of thing.
>> Why do you suppose the circle
became so universally symbolic?
>> Well, because it's
experienced all the time.
You experience it in the day
and year, just as we've said,
and you experience it
in leaving home, going
on your adventure, hunting
or whatever it may be,
and coming back to home.
And then there's
a deeper one also,
the mystery of the
womb and the tomb.
When people are buried,
it's for rebirth.
I mean, that's the origin
of the burial idea.
You put back into the womb
of Mother Earth or rebirth.
>> And Jung kept returning
to that theme of the circle
as being the sort
of universal symbol.
>> Well, Jung used that as a
pedagogical device, actually,
what he called the mandala.
This was actually a Hindu
term for a sacred circle.
>> Here is one of the pictures.
>> That's a very
elaborate mandala.
You have the deity at
the center with the power
source, the illumination
source, and these
are the manifestations or
aspects of its radiance.
But in working out a mandala
for oneself, what one does
is draw a circle and then
think of the different impulse
systems in your life,
the different value
systems in your
life, and try then
to compose them and
find what the center.
It's a kind of
discipline for pulling
all those scattered
aspects of your life
together and finding a center
and ordering yourself to it.
So you're trying to
coordinate your circle
with the universal circle.
>> To be at the center.
>> At the center.
The Navajo have
that wonderful image
of what they call
the pollen path.
And when you realize what
pollen is, it's the life source.
And it's a single
path of the center.
And then they would say, beauty
for me, beauty behind me,
beauty to the right of me,
beauty to the left of me,
beauty above me, beauty below
me, I'm on the pollen path.
[CHANTING]
And then the little
cosmos of one's own life
and the macrocosm
of the world's life
are in some way
to be coordinated.
Well, for instance,
among the Navajo Indians,
healing ceremonies
were conducted
by way of sand
paintings, which are
mostly mandalas on the ground.
And then the person who is to be
treated moves into the mandala.
There will be a
mythological context
that they will be
identifying with,
and he identifies
himself with that power.
And this idea of sand
painting with mandalas
and used for meditation
purposes appears also in Tibet,
in the great tantric monasteries
outside of Lhasa, for instance,
Gyuto, they practiced sand
painting, cosmic images and so
forth, indicating the forces
of the spiritual powers that
operate in our lives.
>> Now, what do
you make of that,
that in two very
different cultures,
the same imagery emerges?
>> Yes.
Well, there are only
two ways to explain it,
and one is by diffusion, that
an influence came from there
to here.
And the other is by
separate development.
And when you have the idea
of separate development,
this speaks for certain
powers in the psyche which
are common to all mankind.
Otherwise, you couldn't have--
and to the detail
the correspondences
can be identified,
it's astonishing
when one studies
these things in depth
the degree to which the
agreements go between totally
separated cultures.
>> Which says something about
the commonality of the species,
doesn't it?
>> Well, yes, that
was Carl Jung's idea,
which he calls the archetypes,
archetypes of the collective
unconscious.
>> What do you
mean by archetypes?
>> An archetype is a
constant form, a basic,
fundamental form which appears
in the works of that person
over there and this person over
here, without connecting them.
They are expressions of the
structure of the human psyche.
>> So if you find in a variety
of cultures each one telling
the story of creation, the
story of a virgin birth,
the story of a savior who comes
and dies and is resurrected,
you're saying something about
what is inside us and the need
to understand.
>> That's right.
One can say that
the images of myth
are reflections of spiritual
and depth potentialities
of every one of us.
And that through
contemplating those,
we evoke those powers
in our own lives
to operate through ourselves.
There was a very
important anthropologist--
he's the one with whom my
works begin, you might say,
my studies--
Bastian in Germany,
end of the last century
in first part of this.
He was a world
traveler and recognized
very soon that there were
certain motifs that appeared
in all of the religions
and all of the mythologies
in the world.
Such an idea, for example,
as a spiritual power,
that's an archetypal image
that appears everywhere.
And he called these
elementary ideas.
But they appear in
very different forms
and different provinces
and at different times.
And those different
forms or costumes
he called ethnic or folk ideas.
But within the ethnic idea
is the elementary idea.
And it is those elementary
ideas that Carl Jung
then began studying and called
archetypes of the unconscious.
When you say elementary idea,
they seem to come from up here.
When you say archetypes
of the unconscious,
they come from up here, and
they appear in our dreams
as well as in the myths.
>> So when one scripture talks
about being made in his image,
in God's image, it's being
created with certain qualities
that every human
being possesses,
no matter what that
person's religion or culture
or geography or heritage.
>> God would be the ultimate
elementary idea of man.
>> The primal need.
>> And we are all made
in the image of God, OK?
So that is the ultimate
elementary idea
or archetype of man.
>> I feel stronger in my own
faith knowing that others had
the same yearnings and were
seeking for the same images
to try to express an experience
that couldn't be costumed
in an ordinary human language.
>> That's right.
>> I feel much more kinship with
all those who follow other ways
because--
>> This is why clowns are good--
>> Clowns?
>> --in religions, because
they show that the image is not
a fact, but it's a
reflex of some kind.
>> So does this help explain
the trickster gods that show up
from time to time?
>> It's very much that, yes.
Some of the best
trickster stories
are associated with our
American Indian tales.
Now, these figures are
clown-like figures,
and yet they are the creator
gods at the same time,
very often.
And this makes the point, I
am not the ultimate image.
I am transparent to something.
Through me, through
my funny form,
and mocking it and turning
it into a grotesque action,
you really get the
sense which, if I
had been a big, sober presence,
you get stuck with the image.
>> There's a wonderful story
in some African tradition
of the god who's
walking down the road,
and the god has on a hat that
is colored red on one side
and blue on the other side.
So when the people the
farmers in the field
go in to the village in
the evening, they say,
did you see that fellow,
that god with the blue hat?
And the others say, no,
no, he had a red hat on.
And they get into a fight.
>> He even makes it worse
by first walking along this
direction, then turning
around, turning his head around
so that, again, it'll be
red and black or whatever.
And then when these two
chaps fight and are brought
before the king or
chief for judgment,
this fellow appears, and he
says, it's my fault. I did it.
Spreading strife
is my greatest joy.
>> And there's a truth in that.
>> There sure is.
>> Which is?
>> No matter what system
of thought you have,
it can't possibly
include boundless life.
And when you think
everything's just that way,
the trickster comes
in, it all blows,
and you get the big
coming thing again.
Now, Jung has a wonderful
saying somewhere.
Religion is a defense against
a religious experience.
>> Oh, you have to explain that.
>> Well, that means it has
reduced the whole thing
to concepts and ideas, and
having the concept and idea
short circuits the
transcendent experience.
The experience of
deep mystery is
what one has to regard as the
ultimate religious experience.
>> But there are many Christians
who believe that to try to find
out who Jesus is, you have to
go past the Christian faith,
past the Christian doctrine,
past the Christian church.
And I know that's heresy
for a lot of people.
>> Well, you have to go
past the image of Jesus.
The image of god becomes
the final obstruction.
Your God is your
ultimate barrier.
This is basic Hinduism,
basic Buddhism,
the idea of the ascent of the
spirit through the centers,
the chakras, as they're
called, or lotuses,
the different centers
of experience,
the animal experiences
of hunger and greed,
or just the zeal
of reproduction,
or physical mastery of
one kind or another.
These are all stages of power.
But then when the
center of the heart
is reached and the
sense of compassion
on another person,
mercy and participation,
and I and you are in some
sense of the same being--
this is what marriage
is based on--
there is a whole new stage
of life experience opens up
with the opening of the heart.
And this is what's called
the virgin birth, actually,
the birth of a spiritual life
in what formerly was simply
a human animal living for the
animal aims of health, progeny,
wealth, and a little fun.
But now you come
to something else
to participate in
this sense of accord
with another or accord
with some principle that
has lodged in your mind as a
good to be identified with.
Then a whole new life comes.
And this is, in
oriental thinking,
the awakening of the
religious experience.
And then this can go on even
to the quest for the experience
of the ultimate mystery.
Now, the ultimate mystery
can be experienced
in two senses, one without
form and the other with form.
And in this oriental
thinking, you
experience god with form here.
This is heaven.
That's the identification
with your own being
because that which
god refers to is
the ultimate mystery
of being, which
is the mystery of your being
as well as of the world.
So this is it.
>> How do you explain what the
psychologist Maslow calls peak
experiences and what your friend
James Joyce called epiphanies?
I love that word, "epiphanies."
>> Oh, well, they're
not quite the same.
>> I know.
>> The peak experience refers
to actual moments of your life
when you feel that this
has told you something.
Something has come
through in your experience
of your relationship,
through the harmony of being.
It can come-- my
peak experiences,
I mean, the ones that I
knew were peak experiences
after I had them, all
came in athletics.
>> Which was the Everest
of your experience.
>> Yeah.
>> Which one was it, was when
you were running at Columbia?
>> Yes, of course.
And I ran a couple of races
that was just beautiful.
And through the whole race,
I knew I was going to win,
and there was no
reason for me no
I was going to win
because I was touched
off anchoring a relay with the
first man 30 yards ahead of me.
And I just knew, knew it
was a peak experience.
Nobody could beat me today.
That's kind of being in full
form and really doing it.
I don't think I've ever
done anything in my life
as competently as I
ran those two races.
And those, consequently,
were the experience
of really being at my full
and doing perfect job.
I don't think I've
ever had anything
like that quite,
that I really came up
to anything quite that way.
>> Do you think you,
Joseph Campbell,
have to-- it has to be physical?
>> No, but it can be a peak--
there are other kinds
of experiences which
I know were superior to those.
But those are the ones that,
when I read Maslow and read
the peak experience,
I just know that those
were peak experiences.
>> What about James
Joyce's epiphanies?
>> Now, that's another thing.
This has to do with the
aesthetic experience.
Joyce's formula for the
aesthetic experience
is that it does not move you
to want to possess the object.
That he calls pornography.
Nor does it move you
to criticize and reject
the object.
That he calls didactic,
social criticism and art
and all that kind of thing.
It is the holding the object.
And he says, you put
a frame around it
and see it as one thing.
And then seeing it
as one thing, you
become aware of the relationship
of pot to pot, and pot to coal,
and coal to heat the pot.
This is the essential aesthetic
factor, rhythm, the rhythm,
rhythmic relationships.
And when a fortunate rhythm
has been struck by the artist,
that is the radiance.
That's the epiphany.
And that is what would be
the Christ coming through.
Do you understand
what I'm saying?
>> The face of the
saint beholding god.
>> And it doesn't
matter who it is.
I mean, you could take
someone who you would
think of as being a monster.
That is an ethical
judgment on the life,
and this is transcendent
of ethics, no didactic.
>> That's where I would disagree
with you because it seems
to me, in order to
experience the epiphany,
that which you behold but do
not want to possess must be
beautiful in some way.
And a moment ago,
when you talked
about your peak
experience, running,
you said it was beautiful.
Beautiful is an aesthetic word.
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> And how can you
behold a monster?
>> I tell you, there's another
emotion associated with art
which is not of the
beautiful, but of the sublime.
And what we call monsters
can be seen as sublime.
And they represent powers
too great for the mere forms
of life to survive.
Prodigious expanse
of space is sublime.
This is the thing that
the Buddhists know how
to achieve in their temples.
Particularly, when
I was in Kyoto--
I was there for seven
glorious months.
>> In Japan.
>> Yeah, visiting some
of the temple gardens.
They are so designed that you're
experiencing something here.
And then you break
past the screen
and a whole new
horizon opens out.
And somehow, with the
diminishment of your own ego,
the consciousness expands.
This is the experience
of the sublime.
Another experience
of this sublime
is not of tremendous space, but
of tremendous energy and power.
And I have known
a couple of people
who were in central Europe
during the saturation
bombings that were
conducted over those cities.
And there was the--
you just have the experience
of the sublime there.
>> I once interviewed a veteran
of the Second World War,
and I was talking to him about
his experience at the Battle
of the Bulge with the assault
of the Germans about to succeed.
And I said, well, as you
look back on it, what was it?
And he said, it was sublime.
>> And so the monster
comes through there.
>> What do you mean by monster?
>> Well, by a monster I
mean someone who breaks all
of your standards for harmony
and for ethical conduct.
>> Is there a story in mythology
that illustrates the sublime
in the monster?
>> Well, the god of
the end of the world.
Vishnu, at the end of
the world, is a monster.
I mean, he's destroying the
world, first with fire and then
with a torrential
flood that drowns out
the fire and everything else,
and nothing is left but ash.
The whole universe
has been wiped out.
That's god.
>> Well, the Christian
millennialists talk
of the rapture.
>> Well, read
chapter 13 in Mark.
>> Which says?
>> That's the end of the world.
You see, these are experiences
that go past ethical judgment.
Ethics is wiped out.
Our religions, with the
accent on the human,
as I mentioned a little while
ago, also stress the ethical.
God is good.
God is horrific at
the end of the world.
There's an Arab saying
that I read somewhere
in the "Arabian Nights"
of the angel of death.
When the angel of death
comes, it is terrible.
When he has reached
you, it is bliss.
Now, in the Buddhist
systems, particularly
as we get them from Tibet, the
Buddhas appear in two aspects.
There's the peaceful aspect,
and there is the wrathful aspect
of the deity.
Now, if you're clinging to
your ego and its little world
and hanging on, and the
deity wants to open you,
the wrathful aspect comes.
It seems to you terrible.
But if you are open
and open enough,
then that same deity would
be experienced as bliss.
>> Well, Jesus talked
of bringing a sword,
and I don't believe he meant
that in terms of using it
against your fellow, but he
meant it in terms of opening
the ego.
I came to cut you free from the
binding ego of your own self.
>> It's known in Sanskrit
as viveka, discrimination.
And there is a
Buddha figure called
Manjushri who will be shown with
a flaming sword over his head.
And what is the sword for?
It's to distinguish the merely
temporal from the eternal.
It's the sword
that distinguishes
that which is enduring from
that which is merely passing.
The tick, tick, tick of
time shuts out eternity,
and we live in
the field of time.
But what is living
in the field of time
is an eternal principle
that's inflected this way.
>> What's the eternal principle?
>> But one.
>> Which is?
>> Well, we call it god, but
that personifies it, you see.
>> It is the experience
of the eternity.
>> Yeah.
>> The experience
of the eternal.
>> As what you are, I would say.
>> That whatever eternity
is, is here right now.
>> And nowhere else,
or everywhere else.
If you don't experience
it now, you're
never going to get
it because when
you get to heaven,
that's not eternal,
that's just everlasting.
Heaven lasts a long time.
It's not eternal,
it's everlasting.
>> I don't follow that now.
>> The eternal is beyond time.
The concept of time
shuts out eternity.
>> Time is our invention.
>> Our experience, yeah.
But the ultimate
unqualified mystery
is beyond human experience.
It becomes inflected.
As they say, there
is a condescension
on the part of the infinite
to the mind of man,
and that is what looks like god.
>> So whatever it
is we experience,
we have to express and
language that is just not up
to the occasion.
>> That's it.
That's what poetry is for.
Poetry is a language that
has to be penetrated.
It doesn't shut you off.
It opens.
It's the rhythm.
The precise choice
of words that will
have implications
and suggestions that
go past the word is
what has to happen.
And then you get
what Joyce calls
the radiance, the epiphany.
The epiphany is
the showing through
of the essence,
what Aquinas called
quidditas, the what-ness.
The what-ness is the brahman.
>> Why do you think it is there
is in so many people this deep
yearning to live forever, to
secure my place in heaven?
>> When you realize
what heaven is, I mean,
in the works of such
person as Thomas Aquinas,
it is the beholding of
the beatific image of god,
which is a timeless moment.
Time explodes.
So again, eternity is not
something everlasting.
And you can have it right here
now in your relationships.
I've lost a lot of friends
and my parents and all,
and a realization that has
come to me very, very keenly
is that I haven't lost
them, that that moment when
I was with them had an
everlasting quality about it
that is now still with me.
What it gave me
is still with me.
And there's a kind of intimation
of immortality in that.
Do you see what I mean?
>> But in the sense that you
were talking about eternity
beyond the body,
experienced now in the body,
but being beyond time, has
anybody told a story that--
>> Well, there's the story
of the Buddha who encountered
a woman who had
just lost her son.
And she was in great grief.
And the Buddha said, I
suggest you just asked around
to meet somebody who has
not lost a treasured child
or husband or
relative or friend.
And this business of
understanding the relationship
of mortality to something
in you that is transcendent
of mortality is the big job.
Now, there's the wonderful
work of Schopenhauer's.
He says, when you
reach a certain age--
and he wrote this when
he was in his 60s or so--
and look back over your life,
it seems to have had an order.
It seems to have been
composed by someone.
And those events, that
when they occurred
seemed merely accidental and
occasional and just something
that happened, turn out
to be the main elements
in a consistent plot.
So he says, who
composed this plot?
And he said, and
just as your dreams
are composed by an
aspect of yourself,
of which your
consciousness is unaware,
so your whole life
has been composed
by the will within you.
Then he says, just as those
people who you met by chance
became effective agents in
the structuring of your life,
so you have been an agent in
the structuring of other lives.
And the whole thing gears
together like one big symphony,
he says, everything
influencing and structuring
everything else.
And he said, it's
as though our lives
were the dream of a single
dreamer in which all the dream
characters are dreaming too.
And so everything links
to everything else,
moved out of the will in nature.
It's a beautiful idea.
It's an idea that
occurs in India
in the image of what's
called the net of Indra,
or the net of gems.
It's a net of gems
where every gem reflects
all the other ones.
And they also have the idea of
a spontaneous and simultaneous
arising.
Everything arises in
relation to everything else,
and so you can't blame
anybody for anything.
It's all working around--
it's a marvelous idea.
It's as though there were
an intention behind it,
and yet all this by chance.
None of us has lived the
life that he intended.
>> And yet, we all have lived
a life that had a purpose.
Do you believe that?
>> I don't believe
life has a purpose.
I mean, when you really
see what life is,
it's a lot of protoplasm with an
urge to reproduce and continue
in being.
>> Not true.
That's not true.
>> Well, no, wait a minute.
Just sheer life can't be said
to have a purpose because look
at all the different purposes
it has all over the lot.
But each incarnation, you
might say, has a potentiality,
and the function of life is
to live that potentiality.
Well, how do you do it?
Well, again, when my students
would ask, should I do this?
Should I do that?
Dad says, I should do this.
And my answer is,
follow your bliss.
There's something
inside you that
knows you're in the center, that
knows you're on the beam, that
knows you're off the beam.
And if you get off the
beam to earn money,
you've lost your life.
>> So it is not the destination
that counts, it's the journey.
>> Yes.
There's a wonderful old man--
I think he's still
alive in Germany--
Karlfried Graf Durckheim.
And he says, when
you're on a journey
and the end keeps getting
further and further away,
then you realize that
the real end the journey.
That's not bad.
This is it.
This moment now is
the heavenly moment.
>> I like the idea that
Eden was not, Eden will be.
>> Eden is.
The kingdom of the father
spread upon the Earth,
and men do not see it.
I mean, Eden is.
>> There's some image of
Shiva the God Shiva surrounded
by circles of flame,
rings of fire.
>> That's the
Dance of the World,
the dancer whose
dance is the universe.
And in this hand,
he has a little drum
that goes tick, tick, tick.
That is the drum of
time, the tick of time
which shuts out eternity.
And we are enclosed in that.
In this had, there
is a flame which
burns away the veil of time
and opens us up to eternity.
And in his hair is a
skull and a new moon,
the death and rebirth
at the same moment,
the moment of becoming.
>> That's a powerful image
for any life, not just--
>> Well, the goal of your quest
for yourself is to find that
burning point in yourself, that
becoming thing in yourself,
which is fearless and
desireless, but just becoming.
This is the condition of a
warrior going into battle
with perfect courage.
And that's life in
movement, a plant growing.
I think of grass.
Every two weeks, a chap
comes out with a lawn mower
and cuts it down.
Suppose the grass were to
say, well, for Pete's sake.
What's the use?
It's the coming into
being that's it.
And that's the lifepoint in you.
And that's what these myths are
concerned to communicate to.
>> Well, I've always
interpreted that powerful,
mysterious statement,
the word was made flesh,
as this eternal principle
finding itself in the human
journey, the human experience.
And I don't know
what the word is,
and I don't even
know what flesh is.
But I know that there is
that experience of epiphany
when you meet what you don't
know and understand it.
>> Yeah, and you can
find it in yourself, too,
the word in yourself.
>> Where do you find it if
you don't find it yourself?
>> Well, Goethe says,
all things are metaphors.
[NON-ENGLISH].
Everything that's transitory is
but a metaphorical reference.
That's what we all are.
And to see the word--
we're getting back
to that your radiance
that we spoke of before
comes out here again now.
>> But how does one worship
a metaphor, love a metaphor,
die for a metaphor?
>> Well, that's what people
are doing all over the place.
That's what people are
doing all over the place,
dying for metaphors.
And when you really
realize the sound aum,
the sound of the
mystery of the word,
everywhere, then you
don't have to go out
die for anything because
it's right there all around.
And just sit still and see it
and experience it you know it.
>> Explain aum.
That's the first time
you've used that.
>> Well, aum is a word that--
what can I say--
represents to our
ears that sound
of the energy of the universe,
of which all things are
manifestations.
And aum is a wonderful word.
It's written A-U-M. you start
in the back of the mouth, ah.
And then, ooh, you
fill the mouth.
And mm closes at the mouth.
And when you have
pronounced this properly,
all vowel sounds are in
that pronunciation, aum.
And consonants are regarded
simply as interruptions of aum.
And all words are
thus fragments of aum,
as all images are fragments
of the form of forms
of which all things
are just reflections.
And so aum is a symbol,
a symbolic sound,
that puts you in touch
with that throbbing being
that is the universe.
[CHANTING]
And when you hear some
of these Tibetan monks
that are over here from
the Gyuto monastery
outside of Lhasa, when
they sing the aums,
you know what it
means, all right.
That's the zoom of
being in the world.
And to be in touch with that and
to get the sense of that, that
is the peak experience of all.
Ah, ooh, mm, the birth,
the coming into being,
and the dissolution,
the cycle of that.
And this is called the
four element syllable.
What is the fourth element?
Ah, ooh, mm, and the silence
out of which it comes,
back into which it goes,
and which underlies it.
Now, my life is the ah, ooh, mm.
But there is a silence
that underlies it,
and that is what we
would call the immortal.
This is the mortal, and
that's the immortal.
And there wouldn't be this
if there weren't that.
>> The meaning is
essentially wordless.
>> Yes.
Well, words are always
qualifications and limitations.
>> And yet, Joe, all we puny
human beings are left with is
this miserable language,
beautiful though it is,
that falls short of
trying to describe--
>> That's right.
And that's why it's
a peak experience
to break past all that every
now and then to realize, oh, ah,
I think so.
[MUSIC PLAYING]